Tag Feature RFC (#4)
LemmyNet/rfcs: 0004-post-tags.md

- Feature Name: Post Tags
- Start Date: 2023-11-04
- RFC PR: [LemmyNet/rfcs#0004](https://github.com/LemmyNet/rfcs/pull/4)

> - Lemmy Issue: [LemmyNet/lemmy#317](https://github.com/LemmyNet/lemmy/issues/317)

Reviewer: Imo we can change the rfc numbering to start from 1 and simply increment, instead of using the pull request number. Otherwise we will have lots of numbers skipped because of issues which will look ugly.

Reviewer 2: It's what the Rust people also do in their repo (and it's in our readme as well). Their numbers also have holes but the advantage is they fit with the github "hashtag" linking and avoid confusion. Since the rust people tend to know what they're doing I'd suggest to keep the same method

Reviewer: Yep its true, using manual numbers means that RFC numbers would have to be changed if there are multiple RFCs open and merged at overlapping times or not merged at all. So using the PR number is much easier.

Author: Agree with keeping the numbering as is, it makes it very clear where which RFC was merged. Plus as mentioned any other numbering would mess up the workflow a bit.

I'll just close this as resolved then.

# Summary

Ability to add descriptive tags to Posts similar to Reddit's Flair system primarily on a per-community basis.

# Motivation

Post Tags would allow for vastly improved content filtering (and to a lesser extent searching) both for Users and Admins/Moderators. 

# Guide-level explanation

Tags grant you more fine grained control over the content you see on Lemmy. Certain users do not want to see certain content and tags allow you to do exactly that.

> For example a lot of communities offer mixed content such as Memes, News and Discussions. Some people would like to only see News or Discussions. In such a case they could blacklist (filter out) the "Meme" tag, going forward they would not be presented with any Memes in that community.

Reviewer 3: You'd need to clarify then, who is creating and applying these tags. Because if its the posters / users themselves, rather than the community moderators, then it won't help you with filtering.

If the tags are completely unmoderated, and anyone can tag something with any tag they want, it would be far worse for that than subscribing or blocking as it exists already.

Reviewer 4: A potential "curator" moderation level whose entire purpose is to adjust tags could be introduced, though you could definitely make the argument that this is overkill for most kinds of communities.

Author: Intended curation for the start is that Admins/Moderators create these tags, mostly because Lemmy's current permission system doesn't allow for much anything else without significant work. Clarified the language in the section a bit (see d894b357ef2372ec56a9b3e75fa95bc5d315ac94).

> For example a lot of communities offer mixed content such as Memes, News and Discussions. Some people would like to only see News or Discussions. In such a case they could blacklist (filter out) the "Meme" tag, going forward they would not be presented with any Memes in that community.

Reviewer 3: Don't use blacklist, use blocklist.

Author: Fixed in f06020111267da838ad56518cd0b7a1ce3483d38

Another use for tags is better handling of how posts are displayed. For example some people would like the content of a post to stay hidden for all users. This could be the case in a community focused on release discussions of Books, Movies, TV Shows or communities with content some users might find offensive but which is not neccesarily NSFW (for example jokes about certain topics).

> Essentially the tags serve as an easier way to message what is *inside* the post. Combining multiple tags allows for even finer control. Made a post about news in poland? Add the "News" and "Poland" tags to it and people interested exclusively in polish news can find it easily or people not interested can avoid it just as easily.

Reviewer 2: I think a description of who defines a post's tags and who can edit them is missing

Author: Added some clarification around that (see https://github.com/LemmyNet/rfcs/commit/d894b357ef2372ec56a9b3e75fa95bc5d315ac94).

# Reference-level explanation

### Protocol:

> According to https://www.w3.org/TR/activitystreams-vocabulary/#dfn-tags a general tag object exists in the ActivityPub protocol. 

Reviewer 2: This is not exactly accurate, reading the spec it says that a `tag` property, containing an Object list is part of all Objects. This means that we need to define our own Tag Object type(s). So the tags would look more like this:

```json
{
  "type": "Post",
  "tags": [
    {
      "@type": "https://json-ld.lemmy.ml/CommunityTag",
      "id": "https://lemmy.world/t/FooTag",
      "name": "FooTag"
    }
  ],
  ...
}
```

Reviewer 2: Meaning: The exact properties the tag object should have should probably be part of this RFC. And also specifying if there's multiple different tag types or if they (community+instance tags) have the same interface

Reviewer 2: Just for reference, here's how mastodon uses hashtags:
`curl -H 'Accept: application/activity+json' https://mastodon.social/@nixCraft/111361899987606218`
```
  "tag": [
    {
      "type": "as:Hashtag",
      "href": "https://mastodon.social/tags/linux",
      "name": "#linux"
    }
  ],
```

Using the non-standardized ActivityStreams:HashTag type (https://github.com/w3c/activitypub/issues/235)

Reviewer: The tag system for Lemmy seems fundamentally different from hashtags in Mastodon, so I think its reasonable to federate them in a way thats intentionally incompatible.

Reviewer 2: Agree - I just put it as a comparison. We should create our own object type.

Reviewer 5: @Nutomic What is the fundamental difference between tags described in this proposal and hashtags used by microblogging services like Mastodon? I've read the proposal and there are many similarities.

---

btw, the URL in a highlighted section is not correct. It should be https://www.w3.org/TR/activitystreams-vocabulary/#dfn-tag (not `#dfn-tags`)

Reviewer 4: If Lemmy federates a separate custom-built Tag object instead of `Hashtag`s it has the ability to edit or delete tags without having to send a few billion `Update`s to individually edit all posts that have said tags attached to them. (Instead it can just `Update` the individual tag)

This would also allow for a protocol for cross-instance tag moderation to be built, e.g. using `Add/Tag` `Undo/Add/Tag` (`Accept/Add/Tag` and `Reject/Add/Tag` for tag suggestions?) which AFAIK is impossible with the current design of hashtags (and wouldn't federate to existing implementations anyway)

Author: > What is the fundamental difference between tags described in this proposal and hashtags used by microblogging services like Mastodon? I've read the proposal and there are many similarities.

Mostly Lemmy tags being static as opposed to dynamically user created. The Lemmy tags exist in a database table and can be mass edited if needed since they will be referenced by id. Plus the general use case for tags on Lemmy seems less a "just randomly tagging this so people can find it elsewhere" and more a "this community has broad interests so I'll specify what's roughly inside this post"

Author: > This would also allow for a protocol for cross-instance tag moderation to be built, e.g. using Add/Tag Undo/Add/Tag (Accept/Add/Tag and Reject/Add/Tag for tag suggestions?) which AFAIK is impossible with the current design of hashtags (and wouldn't federate to existing implementations anyway)

Should be possible, changes to tags would still need to be federated but the posts themselves should be able to stay untouched. Simply changing the values in the tag table should "edit" all existing posts automatically.

Author: > This is not exactly accurate, reading the spec it says that a tag property, containing an Object list is part of all Objects. This means that we need to define our own Tag Object type(s). So the tags would look more like this:

this seems to be correct, I've added the relevant part to the RFC with b6afe0786f537791cbe7e7cbc20e9245cabac123. I think the initial tag object can be kept simple, it's easier to add things later on than remove them imo.

Entirely unmoderated tags are not an option for lemmy as the moderation workload would be too much. Additionally users being able to type out tags themselves introduces splintering in the tag contents due to typos. A better solution is a curated list of tags users can attach to their posts. The list of tags can be maintained by both admins and moderators allowing for each community to tailor tags to their specific needs.
Content for both sets of tags would be located in their respective root:

- Instance Tags: `https://example.org/t/tag`

> - Community Tags: `https://example.org/c/instance/t/tag`

Reviewer: The basic tag functionality is already complicated enough especially with federation in the mix. So I would get rid of the instance tags and move them to future possibilities instead. For the initial implementation its enough if each community can have its own tags. Sharing tags across different communities also seems needlessly complex with little benefit.

Reviewer 2: Agree that it makes sense to restrict to only community tags for now because I'm already thinking of many other things it could be extended with that would make it a behemoth

Reviewer 3: I can think of 5 things which can be potentially tagged, some of these have issues already:

- Users: https://github.com/LemmyNet/lemmy/issues/1456
- Communities: https://github.com/LemmyNet/lemmy/issues/2675
- Posts: https://github.com/LemmyNet/lemmy/issues/317
- Instances
- Comments

Its pretty unclear which of these tags would be created (and applied) by either users, community mods, or instance admins.

Author: Moved Instance tags to the future outlook section and added some of the other options mentioned. (see ec854369f6c2306b16752e3ce3e650ea73983583)

Closing as resolved

> The tag URL can then be utilized as a unique identifier for the tag, populating the `id` field of the tag object. Using the object ID optional tag federation can also be achieved, allowing for communities across multiple instances to share content via tags (example: News tag shared across instances). This would also solve the issue of splintered communities across instances while not forcing it on the communities in question. For now tags will only be applicable to posts, however the general design allows for them to be attached to any kind of object later on, be that instance, community or user. The limited initial scope allows for easier modifications should any rough edges or missing features be discovered.

Reviewer 4: > The tag URL can then be utilized as a unique identifier for the tag

...and you just gave up the ability to rename tags without having to individually un-tag and re-tag all posts. The ID of a tag should be totally opaque, either some kind of UUID or an autoincrement number like current post/comment IDs.

Author: Mixed up the lingo in the RFC, if you check later down I mention tag id's. Changed the language anyway because what is written in your excerpt clearly contradicts what I wanted to write and what I wrote a few paragraphs below it.

To fill all needed use cases 3 tag types will be needed:

- NSFW
- Content Warning
- Generic Tag

Theoretically NSFW could be implemented using a preset "Content Warning" tag but seperating out this tag allows instances to better filter it out for moderation purposes (for example if no admin/moderator is willing to moderate NSFW content).

> Both "NSFW" and "Content Warning" tags should blur the post body by default. Additionally the `sensitive` post flag to `true` should either of these types be present in the post tags to ensure correct handling on other fediverse platforms.

Reviewer 4: This could be made slightly more flexible by having a "tag categories", which itself could then be marked as sensitive or "should be behind a cw". You could also move styling and sorting data into the category object to have tags that are colored consistently and sorted in a predictable way.

Of course, not sure how necessary this separation would be, just throwing an idea out there.

# Prior art

Similar implementations can be found on Reddit as well as a great many image hosting platforms.

> Reddit's Flair System is rather restrictive, a Post can only have a single custom Flair (such as "News") greatly limiting the usefullness of the feature.

Reviewer: There are also cases where multiple tags dont make sense, for example there shouldnt be a post tagged as "Meme" and "News". So it would make some sense to follow Reddit on this one. This would also make the database changes much easier.

Reviewer 2: Mh here I think allowing multiple tags should be there from the start

Author: Absolutely do not want reddit's system as it is way too restrictive to really make use of tags but I think a limit for tags can be implemented on a community level for moderators and admins to regulate. Since I have a hard time judging how much work that would add to the RFC I've added it to the Future possibilities section, if it's deemed to important to ship later I'll move it up somewhere into the text. (see 5a3082a01fbd9df1d07beab2141cef71a3972c0b)

Pros:
- low moderation effort due to predefined tags
- no/little content fragmentation since typos are not possible
- no flair spam due to only 1 flair being allowed at a time

Cons:
- extreme moderation effort for 1st time setup due to inability to mix flairs
- filter lists get extremely long because all variants of a flair need to be filtered (for example "News Europe", "News America", etc. instead of just "News")
- flairs need to be created before being usable

Tag/Flair Systems on Image hosting platform generally tend to favor a more unmoderated experience, often allowing Users to type in the tags themselves.

Pros:
- enhanced user freedom when applying tags
- no delay between arising demand for tag and creation of the tag

Cons:
- greater moderation demand since tags have to be checked for inappropriate content
- very high chance for content fragmentation (typos, differences in naming things, language barriers)
- almost completely removes the ability of users to blacklist content tags (pronography would slip past a "pornography" blacklist).

# Unresolved questions

> - How would tags federate/display on other Fediverse services such as Mastodon?

Reviewer 4: While it'd definitely be useful to federate tags as hashtags and such, I don't think Lemmy should restrict itself to the limitations of hashtags. Instead, consider creating an AP extension (or adopting an already existing extension if one already exists) that:

- Allows editing of the tags themselves (renaming or otherwise)
- Has the ability to adjust tags across instance boundaries (potentially via `Accept/` `Reject/` so implementations can create some sort of "tag suggestion" UI?)
- That does not have anything to do with communities (remember: not all fediverse software need that concept!)
  - The concept of "instance-level tags" and "community-level tags" should be a concept enforced by the Lemmy backend and not ActivityPub itself

This would make it so that any other fediverse projects that want a similar level of flexibility in tags can just adopt Lemmy's extension and get interoperability "for free", even if they're built for different audiences.

Perhaps some tags could be marked as "hashtaggable", but I don't think all tags should federate as hashtags. a tag such as `Spoiler` does not need a hashtag. (in fact, a CW would be more appropriate!), not to mention the more hashtags you add the more Update activities you need to broadcast per tag change.

Reviewer: It may be worth writing an [FEP](https://codeberg.org/fediverse/fep/) about this.

Reviewer 5: I saw several discussions around content labeling, and [Web Annotation Protocol](https://www.w3.org/TR/annotation-protocol/) is often brought up. It might be a good foundation for such FEP. No need to adopt the protocol as is, but I think their vocabulary can be useful.

Another use for tags is better handling of how posts are displayed. For example some people would like the content of a post to stay hidden for all users. This could be the case in a community focused on release discussions of Books, Movies, TV Shows or communities with content some users might find offensive but which is not neccesarily NSFW (for example jokes about certain topics).

In order to ensure this consistency while filtering tags can only be created by privileged users, initially that is intended to be Admins and Community moderators.

Essentially the tags serve as an easier way to message what is *inside* the post. Combining multiple tags allows for even finer control. Made a post about news in poland? Add the "News" and "Poland" tags to it and people interested exclusively in polish news can find it easily or people not interested can avoid it just as easily.

# Reference-level explanation

### Protocol:

> According to https://www.w3.org/TR/activitystreams-vocabulary/#dfn-tags a general tag object exists in the ActivityPub protocol allowing for custom implementations so long as a type is specified.

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
The [ActivityStreams vocabulary](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitystreams-vocabulary/#dfn-tags) defines that any object can have a list of tags associated with it. Tags in AS can be of any type, so we define our own type `CommunityPostTag`:

```jsonc
{
  "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
  "id": "community-url/tag/tag-id", // e.g. https://example.org/c/example/tag/News
  "name": "Readable Name of Tag"
}
```

In JSON-LD terms, this object will live in the lemmy namespace as `https://join-lemmy.org/ns#CommunityPostTag`), which in objects lemmy sends out is always imported from https://join-lemmy.org/context.json as the prefix `lemmy:`, so we can refer to it as `lemmy:CommunityPostTag`. For example, a lemmy post object (Page in AP terms) would look like this:

```json
{
  "@context": [
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
    "https://join-lemmy.org/context.json"
  ],
  "id": "https://enterprise.lemmy.ml/post/55143",
  "type": "Page",
  "audience": "https://enterprise.lemmy.ml/c/tenforward",
  "name": "Post title",
  "content": "<p>This is a post in the /c/tenforward community</p>\n",
  "tag": [
    {
      "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
      "id": "https://enterprise.lemmy.ml/c/tenforward/tag/news",
      "name": "News"
    }
  ]
  // ... more required props
}
```

````

We name the type `CommunityPostTag` to clarify this tag object is local to this community and contains tagging information about one post.

> To keep things simple an initial community tag object should consist of the following:
> ```json
> {
>   id: number,
>   url: string,
>   name: string
> }
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Entirely unmoderated tags are not an option for lemmy as the moderation workload would be too much. Additionally users being able to type out tags themselves introduces splintering in the tag contents due to typos. A better solution is a curated list of tags users can attach to their posts. The list of tags can be maintained by both admins and moderators allowing for each community to tailor tags to their specific needs.

> Content for tags would be located in the respective root: `https://example.org/c/example/t/tag`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Content for tags would be located in the respective root: `https://example.org/c/example/tag/tag`
```

> The tag URL could then be utilized as a unique identifier for the tag, however doing so would restrict the ability to move the underlying tag url in the future. Instead an additional `id` field should be used. Using the object ID optional tag federation can also be achieved, allowing for communities across multiple instances to share content via tags (example: News tag shared across instances). This would also solve the issue of splintered communities across instances while not forcing it on the communities in question. For now tags will only be applicable to posts, however the general design allows for them to be attached to any kind of object later on, be that instance, community or user. The limited initial scope allows for easier modifications should any rough edges or missing features be discovered.

Reviewer 2: * IDs in AP _must_ be URLs and globally referenceable. The URL should represent the ownership of the object and be resolveable. Otherwise, how would an instance know who to trust wrt updating / adding tags?
* Using a URL of the format `https://instance.com/tags/<UUID>` doesn't make sense because then the ID is still instance-local so doesn't help with community migration.
* Using a URL of the format `https://join-lemmy.org/tags/UUID` also doesn't make sense because then the tag object cannot be fetched and ownership is unclear.
* Making ids opaque is a neat idea, but due to the above doesn't solve many problems and it adds more complexity. Even if the id is hand-picked, we can still allow updates of the other properties of the tag (e.g. shown name and hierarchy).

```suggestion
The ID of a CommunityPostTag is a URL prefixed with `https://instance/c/community/tags/` and a user-chosen or generated (from the name) ID. The ID itself will rarely be user-visible, since the name is used there.

For now tags will only be applicable to posts, however the general design allows for them to be attached to any kind of object later on, be that instance, community or user. The limited initial scope allows for easier modifications should any rough edges or missing features be discovered.
```

> To fill all needed use cases 3 tag flavors will be needed:
> 
> - NSFW
> - Content Warning
> - Generic Tag

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The rest of the RFC is about community-local post tags, but here introduces global tags suddenly. This doesn't really make sense, since this type of tag would be lemmy-global and not community-local.

If we do want this, we should declare those like this:
```json
{
  "type": "GlobalPostTag",
  "id": "https://join-lemmy.org/tags/NSFW",
  "name": "NSFW"
}
```

But we already have NSFW tag (via the fediverse-compatible "sensitive" flag), so this would really only be useful for other global tags, which sounds out of scope for me here. Makes more sense to (initially) let community moderators decide which tags they want.

> Theoretically NSFW could be implemented using a preset "Content Warning" tag but seperating out this tag allows instances to better filter it out for moderation purposes (for example if no admin/moderator is willing to moderate NSFW content).

Reviewer 2: There's not really a point to this since Lemmy already solves this problem (using the sensitive flag), so it doesn't make sense to add a second hack as well.

```suggestion
```

Both "NSFW" and "Content Warning" tags should blur the post body by default. Additionally the `sensitive` post flag to `true` should either of these flavors be present in the post tags to ensure correct handling on other fediverse platforms.

Example Tag Objects:

**Generic Tag:**
```json
{
    "id": 1,
    "url": "https://example.org/c/community/t/tag",
    "name": "Generic Tag"
}
```

**NSFW Tag:**
```json
{
    "flavor": "nsfw",
    "id": 1,
    "url": "https://example.org/c/adult_community/t/nsfw",
    "name": "NSFW"
}
```

**Spoiler Tag:**
```json
{
    "flavor": "cw",
    "id": 1,
    "url": "https://example.org/c/story_community/t/spoiler",
    "name": "Spoiler"
}
```

**Remote Instance Spoiler Tag:**
```json
{
    "flavor": "cw",
    "id": 1,
    "url": "https://example.org/c/example_community/tag@example_remote.org",
    "name": "Spoiler"
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: The "remote instance" example doesn't make sense, since the activitypub URL of the tag will stay the same regardless of which instance is looking at the post object.

The "flavor" attribute IMO doesn't make much sense and isn't really described in enough detail, it seems like instead it makes more sense to add a `hierarchy: "content-warning/triggers/gore"` or `inherits:` property to tags in the future if we want specific tags that imply generic tags.

Author: Agreed, the remote instance example was a symptom of me not really understanding activitypub (which I think is pretty obvious by the extended fixing needed in that section so far, thank you for that a lot)

Personal style preference but I would opt for the `inherits` field instead of the `hierarchy` one, reference the parent tag URL there once and have the server resolve the tag recursively if not already known instead of shipping the entire inheritance tree with every occurrence of the tag. Especially since only the immediate parent needs to be known to sort out the correct display behaviour of a tag. Leaving the field empty (or omitting it entirely, not sure which one would be best practice) would then mean the tag is a root tag that starts a new behaviour tree (for now only display behaviour).

Including this field later should be possible but would absolutely require a way for admins and moderators to change a tag's parent from the settings (something I think is a good idea anyway).
I've moved this specific part to the Future Possibilities Section and added a bit more detail to my thoughts. I also replaced the previous example tags with the tags present in the post example, it's small change but I think it elevates the readability.

See d582286ba980989272d375da00c686bcc99fdade for the changes

Reviewer: The text before this code section still needs to be changed by removing the sentence "In order to share this news post across instances it also is tagged with the news tag of a remote instance".

Reviewer 2: it might make sense to do what you say, but it's also a lot more complex. IMO tags shouldn't need resolution or complex whatever algorithms at all, the hierarchy should purely be a way to allow prefix-based filtering in a bit of a structured way. everything you need to know about the tag should be contained within the tag.

anyways, hierarchy is a discussion for a nother time i guess and it's good to leave it out for now

Below is an example of a News post in the news community. The post has a communtiy tag for the newspaper company that published it, as well as a content warning for Blood/Gore. In order to share this news post across instances it also is tagged with the news tag of a remote instance.

Example Post json:

``` json

> {

Reviewer 2: just add context to make the object actually globally well-defined, and add the community for clarity:

```suggestion
{
  "@context": [
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
    "https://join-lemmy.org/context.json"
  ],
  "to": [
    "https://example.org/c/news",
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams#Public"
  ],
  "audience": "https://example.org/c/news",
```

  "content": ". . .",
  "sensitive": true,
  "tag": [

>     {
>       "id": 1,
>       "url": "https://example.org/c/news/t/newspaper_company_1",
>       "name": "Newspaper Company Tag"
>     },
>     {
>       "flavor": "cw",
>       "id": 2,
>       "url": "https://example.org/c/viral_clips/t/blood",
>       "name": "Blood/Gore"
>     },
>     {
>       "id": 3,
>       "url": "https://example.org/c/tv_shows/t/news@example_remote.org",
>       "name": "News"
>     }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    {
      "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
      "url": "https://example.org/c/news/tag/newspaper-company-1",
      "name": "Related to Newspaper Company 1"
    },
    {
      "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
      "url": "https://example.org/c/news/tag/blood-gore",
      "name": "Blood/Gore"
    },
    {
      "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
      "url": "https://example.org/c/news/tag/news",
      "name": "News"
    }
```

  ]
}
```

### Backend:
I am not quite familiar with the Lemmy Backend so any corrections or additions for this section are appreciated.

> One new tables for "community_tags" would be required. This new table would consist of the columns `url`, `name`, `flavor`, `deleted`, `ìd` and `community_id`. Additional columns for tag display style (for example background & text color) could be added later by extending this table.

Reviewer 2: Clarify these are tags for a post within a community:

````suggestion
One new table for "community_post_tag" would be required:

```sql
CREATE TABLE community_post_tag (
  id bigserial PRIMARY KEY,
  community_id bigint REFERENCES community.id,
  ap_id text UNIQUE NOT NULL,
  name text NOT NULL,
  published timestamptz NOT NULL,
  deleted timestamptz NULL,
);
```
  

Additional columns for tag display style (for example background & text color) and hierarchy could be added later by extending this table.
````

> Additionally a table for listing the tags on posts would be needed as some Databases (at least Postgres) do not support Foreign Keys in Arrays. The table would consist of two foreign key columns: `tag_id` and `post_id` with `tag_id` being linked to the id column in the respective community tag table and `post_id` being linked to the id column of the post table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, a way to store the association between posts and tags is needed. This can either be done with a `tags: array[bigint]` column in the post table and a inverse index (`GIN` or `GIST`) or with a new table `post_tag (post_id, tag_id)`
```

Instance Admins should have the option to delete/ban tags.
Instances with nsfw disables/blocked could/should auto reject posts with an nsfw flavor tag.

The following API routes will need to be added:

**GET /tag/list:**
Parameters:

- community_id (optional) 
- auth (optional)

Returns:

> List of all tags, if a community id is specified only tags of that communtiy are returned.

Reviewer 2: let's not make it more complicated than needed and require the community id.

```suggestion
- community_id (required)
- auth (optional)

Returns:
List of all tags in a community.
```

Deleted tags should not be returned in the list unless an admin/moderator.

```json
{
    "tags": [
        {
            "url": "https://example.org/t/tag",
            "name": "Generic Tag",
            "id": 1,

>             "community_id": 1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        {
            "ap_id": "https://example.org/c/community/tag/foo", // activitypub id
            "name": "Foo Tag",
            "id": 1, // the lemmy-internal id
            "community_id": 1 // lemmy-internal community id
```

        },
        {...}
    ]
}
```

**GET /tag:**
Parameters:

- tag_id
- auth (optional)

Returns:
Returns the information for a single tag.
Deleted tags should not be returned unless an admin/moderator.

```json
{
    "tag": 
    {
        "url": "https://example.org/t/tag",
        "name": "Generic Tag",
        "id": 1,
        "community_id": 1
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: I'm actually not convinced we need this endpoint at all. Instead we need to make sure that the AP-endpoint is added and reachable
`````suggestion
`````

> **POST /tag:**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**POST /api/v3/tag/create:**
```

Author: I've added the base `/api/v3/` to the other endpoints as well (see ac7963ffd5ea927e94a5f9fa7a9ee1e57b4164cb)

Parameters:

- name
- flavor
- community_id (optional)

> - auth

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- id_slug // the generated url will be https://instance/c/community/tags/id_slug
- name
- community_id
```

> Tag URL will be generated using the name and communtiy id. Specifying tag type will not be neccesarry initially as only one type exists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Returns:
Object of freshly created tag

**PUT /tag:**
Parameters:

- id
- name
- flavor
- auth

Replaces tag name and flavor with the provided info. Tag type should initially not be changeable Community Id will not be consumed as a parameter as tags should not be community transferable.
The new Tag URL will be generated using the name and communtiy id.

Returns:
Object of freshly created tag

**POST /tag/delete:**
Parameters:

- id
- deleted
- auth

Deletes the tag associated with the id. Updates `deleted` field in table. Allows for un-deleting a tag.

Returns:

> Object of freshly created tag

Reviewer 2: Better not have text than wrong text, and it should be clear how these work without description.

```suggestion
**PUT /tag:**

Request to update tag object, see the post update API request.
**POST /tag/delete:**

Request to delete tag object, see the post delete API request.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
**ActivityPub Endpoint: GET /c/community/tag/foo (Content-Type: application/activity+json)**

This is the AP endpoint (not a lemmy api endpoint) and must contain the tag object response in JSON-LD:

```json
{
  "@context": [
    "https://join-lemmy.org/context.json",
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams"
  ],
  "id": "https://example.org/c/community/tag/foo", // activitypub id
  "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
  "name": "Foo Tag"
}
```
`````

- no delay between arising demand for tag and creation of the tag

Cons:
- greater moderation demand since tags have to be checked for inappropriate content
- very high chance for content fragmentation (typos, differences in naming things, language barriers)
- almost completely removes the ability of users to blocklist content tags (pronography would slip past a "pornography" blocklist).

# Unresolved questions

- How would tags federate/display on other Fediverse services such as Mastodon?
- ~~Should instance wide and community tags be implemented separately or together. If separately which one should be first.~~
-> resolved, community tags will be implemented first with instance tags to follow some time later.
- There is a discussion about creation permissions for tags however that changes nothing about the fundamental functionality and can be discussed after initial experience is gathered.
- Should there be a limit on how many tags can be applied? If so, should this limit be hard coded or community configurable?
-> should be made configurable, still up for debate whether to be implemented with this RFC or later on.

# Future possibilities

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Global Tags

Many tags will probably be the same across different communities. As such, it makes sense to create global tags in the future. These tag objects would still be assigned to posts by users or moderators, but their type would be `GlobalPostTag` and their ID would be global (e.g. `https://join-lemmy.org/tags/xxx`). This way, a user could configure user-global allow/block lists of tags in their Lemmy UI / App.  For example Spoiler,Gore,NSFL,Trigger Warning, ...
```

In order to ensure this consistency while filtering tags can only be created by privileged users, initially that is intended to be Admins and Community moderators.

Essentially the tags serve as an easier way to message what is *inside* the post. Combining multiple tags allows for even finer control. Made a post about news in poland? Add the "News" and "Poland" tags to it and people interested exclusively in polish news can find it easily or people not interested can avoid it just as easily.

# Reference-level explanation

### Protocol:
The [ActivityStreams vocabulary](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitystreams-vocabulary/#dfn-tags) defines that any object can have a list of tags associated with it. Tags in AS can be of any type, so we define our own type `CommunityPostTag`:

```jsonc
{
  "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
  "id": "community-url/tag/tag-id", // e.g. https://example.org/c/example/tag/News
  "name": "Readable Name of Tag"
}
```

> In JSON-LD terms, this object will live in the lemmy namespace as `https://join-lemmy.org/ns#CommunityPostTag`), which in objects lemmy sends out is always imported from https://join-lemmy.org/context.json as the prefix `lemmy:`, so we can refer to it as `lemmy:CommunityPostTag`. For example, a lemmy post object (Page in AP terms) would look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In JSON-LD terms, this type will live in the lemmy namespace as `https://join-lemmy.org/ns#CommunityPostTag`), which in objects lemmy sends out is always imported from https://join-lemmy.org/context.json as the prefix `lemmy:`, so we can refer to it as `lemmy:CommunityPostTag`. For example, a lemmy post object (Page in AP terms) would look like this:
```

The ID of a CommunityPostTag is a URL prefixed with `https://instance/c/community/tags/` and a user-chosen or generated (from the name) ID. The ID itself will rarely be user-visible, since the name is used there.

For now tags will only be applicable to posts, however the general design allows for them to be attached to any kind of object later on, be that instance, community or user. The limited initial scope allows for easier modifications should any rough edges or missing features be discovered.
Additionally per Tag Inheritance could be added by expanding on this structure, more details can be found in [Future Possibilities > Tag Inheritance](#tag-inheritance).

Example Tag Objects:

```json
{
    "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
    "url": "https://example.org/c/news/tag/newspaper-company-1",
    "name": "Related to Newspaper Company 1"
}
```

```json
{
    "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
    "url": "https://example.org/c/news/tag/blood-gore",
    "name": "Blood/Gore"
}
```

```json
{
    "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
    "url": "https://example.org/c/news/tag/news",
    "name": "News"
}
```

> Below is an example of a News post in the news community. The post has a communtiy tag for the newspaper company that published it, as well as a content warning for Blood/Gore. In order to share this news post across instances it also is tagged with the news tag of a remote instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a News post in the news community. The post has a communtiy tag for the newspaper company that published it, as well as a content warning for Blood/Gore.
```

Example Post json:

``` json
{
  "@context": [
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
    "https://join-lemmy.org/context.json"
  ],
  "to": [
    "https://example.org/c/news",
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams#Public"
  ],
  "audience": "https://example.org/c/news",
  "content": ". . .",
  "sensitive": true,
  "tag": [
    {
      "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
      "url": "https://example.org/c/news/tag/newspaper-company-1",
      "name": "Related to Newspaper Company 1"
    },
    {
      "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
      "url": "https://example.org/c/news/tag/blood-gore",
      "name": "Blood/Gore"
    },
    {
      "type": "lemmy:CommunityPostTag",
      "url": "https://example.org/c/news/tag/news",
      "name": "News"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Backend:
I am not quite familiar with the Lemmy Backend so any corrections or additions for this section are appreciated.

One new table for "community_post_tag" would be required:

```sql
CREATE TABLE community_post_tag (

>   id bigserial PRIMARY KEY,
>   community_id bigint REFERENCES community.id,

Reviewer: Were not using bigint/bigserial anywhere.

```suggestion
  id serial PRIMARY KEY,
  community_id int REFERENCES community.id,
```

Reviewer 2: still no? it would make sense to start, for communities maybe 2B limit is fine, but for things like posts and tags probably no, esp. since tags can be arbitrary values created potentially (in the future at least) by anyone

Reviewer: Even comments use normal int for id. And as tags can only be created by admins/mods, there will be much less of them than comments which can be created by anyone.

- no delay between arising demand for tag and creation of the tag

Cons:
- greater moderation demand since tags have to be checked for inappropriate content
- very high chance for content fragmentation (typos, differences in naming things, language barriers)
- almost completely removes the ability of users to blocklist content tags (pronography would slip past a "pornography" blocklist).

# Unresolved questions

- How would tags federate/display on other Fediverse services such as Mastodon?
- ~~Should instance wide and community tags be implemented separately or together. If separately which one should be first.~~
-> resolved, community tags will be implemented first with instance tags to follow some time later.
- There is a discussion about creation permissions for tags however that changes nothing about the fundamental functionality and can be discussed after initial experience is gathered.
- Should there be a limit on how many tags can be applied? If so, should this limit be hard coded or community configurable?
-> should be made configurable, still up for debate whether to be implemented with this RFC or later on.

# Future possibilities

> ### Global Tags

Reviewer 3: Goes from `#` to `###`, it should go to `##`

Author: Should be done with 6257bc3e86bc40a00f26f2a4dd56d15f44209fa7. To be perfectly honest I have no idea why on earth I skipped the headings back when I first wrote this (it seems far too consistent to be random), I noticed it when I was merging the other changes but didn't bother fixing it then. Weird decision from past me....
